Basic overview of p/invoke source generation (#30370)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/native-interop/pinvoke-source-generation.md

---
title: P/Invoke source generation
description: Learn about compile-time source generation for platform invokes in .NET.
ms.date: 07/25/2022
---

> # Source generation for platform invokes

Reviewer: We should mention this is only supported on C#.

> .NET 7 introduces a [source generator](../../csharp/roslyn-sdk/source-generators-overview.md) for P/Invokes which recognizes the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.LibraryImportAttribute>.

Author: ```suggestion
.NET 7 introduces a [source generator](../../csharp/roslyn-sdk/source-generators-overview.md) for P/Invokes in C# which recognizes the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.LibraryImportAttribute>.
```

> When a P/Invoke is defined and called like below, the built-in interop system in the .NET runtime generates an IL stub&mdash;a stream of IL instructions that is JIT-ed&mdash; at run time to facilitate the transition from managed to unmanaged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a P/Invoke is defined and called as shown in the following code, the built-in interop system in the .NET runtime generates an IL stub&mdash;a stream of IL instructions that is JIT-ed&mdash;at run time to facilitate the transition from managed to unmanaged.
```

```csharp

> [DllImport("nativelib", EntryPoint = "to_lower", CharSet = CharSet.Unicode)]
> internal static extern string ToLower(string str);
> 
> string lower = ToLower("StringToConvert");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[DllImport(
    "nativelib",
    EntryPoint = "to_lower",
    CharSet = CharSet.Unicode)]
internal static extern string ToLower(string str);

// string lower = ToLower("StringToConvert");
```
Formatted to avoid horizontal scrollbar, and comment out example code that would otherwise not compile.

```

> The IL stub handles [marshalling](type-marshalling.md) of parameters and return values and calling the unmanaged code while respecting settings on <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute> that affect how the unmanaged code should be invoked (for example, <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute.SetLastError>). Since this IL stub is generated at run time, it is not available for ahead-of-time (AOT) compiler or IL trimming scenarios. Debugging the marshalling logic is also a non-trivial exercise.

Reviewer 2: > Debugging the marshalling logic is also a non-trivial exercise.

Why, are there any suggestions as to how to do this?

Author: Because the IL stub is generated for the invocation at run time, the user can't easily step through it. For diagnostic purposes, the runtime can emit [interop events](https://docs.microsoft.com/dotnet/fundamentals/diagnostics/runtime-interop-events#ilstubgenerated-event) that contain the generated IL. I think the only instructions we have is in an [interop doc](https://github.com/AaronRobinsonMSFT/interop-doc/blob/main/doc/interop-doc.md#diagnostics) that @AaronRobinsonMSFT started (the contents of which we intend to bring to official MS docs, but haven't gotten to).

The P/Invoke source generator, included with the .NET 7 SDK and enabled by default, looks for <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.LibraryImportAttribute> on a `static` and `partial` method to trigger compile-time source generation of marshalling code, removing the need for the generation of an IL stub at run time and allowing the P/Invoke to be inlined. Analyzers and code fixers are also included to help with migration from the built-in system to the source generator and with usage in general.

## Basic usage

The <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.LibraryImportAttribute> is designed to be similar to <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.DllImportAttribute> in usage. We can convert the example above to use P/Invoke source generation by using the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.LibraryImportAttribute> and marking the method as `partial` instead of `extern`:

```csharp

> [LibraryImport("nativelib", EntryPoint = "to_lower", StringMarshalling = StringMarshalling.Utf16)]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[LibraryImport(
    "nativelib",
    EntryPoint = "to_lower",
    StringMarshalling = StringMarshalling.Utf16)]
```

internal static partial string ToLower(string str);
```

During compilation, the source generator will trigger to generate an implementation of the `ToLower` method that handles marshalling of the `string` parameter and return value as UTF-16. Since the marshalling is now generated source code, you can actually look at and step through the logic in a debugger.

### `MarshalAs`

> The source generator also respects usage of <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.MarshalAsAttribute>. The above could also have been written as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The source generator also respects the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.MarshalAsAttribute>. The preceding code could also be written as:
```

```csharp

> [LibraryImport("nativelib", EntryPoint = "to_lower")]
> [return: MarshalAs(UnmanagedType.LPWStr)]
> internal static partial string ToLower([MarshalAs(UnmanagedType.LPWStr)] string str);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[LibraryImport(
    "nativelib",
    EntryPoint = "to_lower")]
[return: MarshalAs(UnmanagedType.LPWStr)]
internal static partial string ToLower(
    [MarshalAs(UnmanagedType.LPWStr)] string str);
```

```

> Some settings for <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.MarshalAsAttribute> are not supported. The source generator will emit an error if you try to use unsupported settings. For more details, see [Differences from `DllImport`](#differences-from-dllimport).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some settings for <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.MarshalAsAttribute> are not supported. The source generator will emit an error if you try to use unsupported settings. For more details, see [Differences from DllImport](#differences-from-dllimport).
```

Links do not support inline code.

### Calling convention

> To specify the calling convention, use <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.UnmanagedCallConvAttribute>. For example:

Reviewer 2: Really wish that `"Conv"` wasn't abbreviated :(.
```suggestion
To specify the calling convention, use <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.UnmanagedCallConvAttribute>, for example:
```

```csharp

> [LibraryImport("nativelib", EntryPoint = "to_lower", StringMarshalling = StringMarshalling.Utf16)]
> [UnmanagedCallConv(CallConvs = new[] { typeof(CallConvStdcall) })]
> internal static partial string ToLower(string str);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[LibraryImport(
    "nativelib",
    EntryPoint = "to_lower",
    StringMarshalling = StringMarshalling.Utf16)]
[UnmanagedCallConv(
    CallConvs = new[] { typeof(CallConvStdcall) })]
internal static partial string ToLower(string str);
```
